London is the capital and most populous city of England and the United Kingdom.Standing on the River Thames in the south east of the island of Great Britain,London has been a major settlement for two millennia. It was founded by theRomans, who named it Londinium. London's ancient core, the City of London,largely retains its 1.12-square-mile (2.9 km2) medieval boundaries. Since atleast the 19th century, "London" has also referred to the metropolis aroundthis core, historically split between Middlesex, Essex, Surrey, Kent andHertfordshire, which today largely makes up Greater London, a region governedby the Mayor of London and the London Assembly.London is a leading global cityin the arts, commerce, education, entertainment, fashion, finance, healthcare,media, professional services, research and development, tourism andtransportation. It is the world's largest financial centre and has the fifth orsixth largest metropolitan area GDP in the world. London is often regarded as aworld cultural capital. It is the world's most-visited city as measured byinternational arrivals and has the world's largest city airport system measuredby passenger traffic. It is the world's leading investment destination, hostingmore international retailers and ultra high-net-worth individuals than anyother city. London's universities form the largest concentration of highereducation institutes in Europe. In 2012, London became the first city to havehosted the modern Summer Olympic Games three times.London has a diverse rangeof people and cultures, and more than 300 languages are spoken in the region.Its estimated mid-2016 municipal population (corresponding to Greater London)was 8,787,892, the largest of any city in the European Union and accounting for13.4% of the UK population. London's urban area is the second most populous inthe EU, after Paris, with 9,787,426 inhabitants at the 2011 census. The city'smetropolitan area is the most populous in the EU with 14,040,163 inhabitants in2016, while the Greater London Authority states the population of thecity-region (covering a large part of the south east) as 22.7 million. Londonwas the world's most populous city from around 1831 to 1925. London containsfour World Heritage Sites: the Tower of London; Kew Gardens; the sitecomprising the Palace of Westminster, Westminster Abbey, and St Margaret'sChurch; and the historic settlement of Greenwich (in which the RoyalObservatory, Greenwich defines the Prime Meridian, 0° longitude, and GMT).Other landmarks include Buckingham Palace, the London Eye, Piccadilly Circus,St Paul's Cathedral, Tower Bridge, Trafalgar Square and The Shard. London ishome to numerous museums, galleries, libraries, sporting events and othercultural institutions, including the British Museum, National Gallery, NaturalHistory Museum, Tate Modern, British Library and West End theatres. The LondonUnderground is the oldest underground railway network in the world.The etymology of London is uncertain. It is an ancient name, attested already inthe first century AD, usually in the Latinised form Londinium; for example,handwritten Roman tablets recovered in the city originating from AD 65/70-80include the word Londinio ("in London").Over the years, the name has attractedmany mythicising explanations. The earliest attested appears in Geoffrey ofMonmouth's Historia Regum Britanniae, written around 1136. This had it that thename originated from a supposed King Lud, who had allegedly taken over the cityand named it Kaerlud.Modern scientific analyses of the name must account forthe origins of the different forms found in early sources Latin (usuallyLondinium), Old English (usually Lunden), and Welsh (usually Llundein), withreference to the known developments over time of sounds in those differentlanguages. It is agreed that the name came into these languages from CommonBrythonic; recent work tends to reconstruct the lost Celtic form of the name as*[Londonjon] or something similar. This was adapted into Latin as Londinium andborrowed into West Germanic, the ancestor-language of English, before Englishhad become widely spoken in what later became England.The etymology andoriginal meaning of the Common Brythonic form is much debated. A prominentexplanation was Richard Coates's 1998 argument that the name derived frompre-Celtic Old European *(p)lowonida, meaning "river too wide to ford". Coatessuggested that this was a name given to the part of the River Thames whichflows through London; from this, the settlement gained the Celtic form of itsname, *Lowonidonjon. However, most work has accepted a Celtic origin for thename, and recent studies have favoured an explanation along the lines of aCeltic derivative of an proto-Indo-European root *lendh- ('sink, cause tosink'), combined with the Celtic suffix *-injo- or *-onjo- (used to formplace-names). Peter Schrijver has specifically suggested, on these grounds,that the name originally meant 'place that floods (periodically,tidally)'.Until 1889, the name "London" officially applied only to the City ofLondon, but since then it has also referred to the County of London and now toGreater London."London" is sometimes abbreviated as "L'don" or "LDN".Two recent discoveries indicate probable very early settlements near the Thames inthe London area. In 1999, the remains of a Bronze Age bridge were found on thesouth foreshore, upstream of Vauxhall Bridge. This bridge either crossed theThames or reached a now lost island in it. Dendrochronology dated the timbersto ca. 1500 BC. In 2010 the foundations of a large timber structure, dated toca. 4500 BC, were found on the Thames foreshore, south of Vauxhall Bridge. Thefunction of the mesolithic structure is not known. Both structures are on thesouth bank, at a natural crossing point where the River Effra flows into theThames.Although there is evidence of scattered Brythonic settlements inthe area, the first major settlement was founded by the Romans about four yearsafter the invasion of AD 43. This lasted only until around AD 61, when theIceni tribe led by Queen Boudica stormed it, burning it to the ground. Thenext, heavily planned, incarnation of Londinium prospered, and it supersededColchester as the capital of the Roman province of Britannia in 100. At itsheight in the 2nd century, Roman London had a population of around 60,000.With the collapse of Roman rule in the early 5th century, London ceased to be acapital, and the walled city of Londinium was effectively abandoned, althoughRoman civilisation continued in the area of St Martin-in-the-Fields untilaround 450. From around 500, an Anglo-Saxon settlement known as Lundenwicdeveloped slightly west of the old Roman city. By about 680, the city hadregrown into a major port, although there is little evidence of large-scaleproduction. From the 820s repeated Viking assaults brought decline. Three arerecorded; those in 851 and 886 succeeded, while the last, in 994, wasrebuffed.The Vikings established Danelaw over much of eastern and northernEngland; its boundary stretched roughly from London to Chester. It was an areaof political and geographical control imposed by the Viking incursions whichwas formally agreed by the Danish warlord, Guthrum and the West Saxon kingAlfred the Great in 886. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle recorded that Alfred"refounded" London in 886. Archaeological research shows that this involvedabandonment of Lundenwic and a revival of life and trade within the old Romanwalls. London then grew slowly until about 950, after which activity increaseddramatically.By the 11th century, London was beyond all comparison the largesttown in England. Westminster Abbey, rebuilt in the Romanesque style by KingEdward the Confessor, was one of the grandest churches in Europe. Winchesterhad previously been the capital of Anglo-Saxon England, but from this time on,London became the main forum for foreign traders and the base for defence intime of war. In the view of Frank Stenton: "It had the resources, and it wasrapidly developing the dignity and the political self-consciousness appropriateto a national capital."After winning the Battle of Hastings, William, Dukeof Normandy was crowned King of England in the newly completed WestminsterAbbey on Christmas Day 1066. William constructed the Tower of London, the firstof the many Norman castles in England to be rebuilt in stone, in thesoutheastern corner of the city, to intimidate the native inhabitants. In 1097,William II began the building of Westminster Hall, close by the abbey of thesame name. The hall became the basis of a new Palace of Westminster.In the 12thcentury, the institutions of central government, which had hitherto accompaniedthe royal English court as it moved around the country, grew in size andsophistication and became increasingly fixed in one place. For most purposesthis was Westminster, although the royal treasury, having been moved fromWinchester, came to rest in the Tower. While the City of Westminster developedinto a true capital in governmental terms, its distinct neighbour, the City ofLondon, remained England's largest city and principal commercial centre, and itflourished under its own unique administration, the Corporation of London. In1100, its population was around 18,000; by 1300 it had grown to nearly 100,000.Disaster struck in the form of the Black Death in the mid-14th century, whenLondon lost nearly a third of its population. London was the focus of thePeasants' Revolt in 1381.London was also a centre of England's Jewishpopulation before their expulsion by Edward I in 1290. Violence against Jewstook place in 1190, after it was rumoured that the new King had ordered theirmassacre after they had presented themselves at his coronation. In 1264 duringthe Second Barons' War, Simon de Montfort's rebels killed 500 Jews whileattempting to seize records of debts.During the Tudor period the Reformation produced a gradual shift to Protestantism, and much of Londonproperty passed from church to private ownership, which accelerated trade andbusiness in the city. In 1475, the Hanseatic League set up its main tradingbase (kontor) of England in London, called the Stalhof or Steelyard. It existeduntil 1853, when the Hanseatic cities of Lübeck, Bremen and Hamburg sold theproperty to South Eastern Railway. Woollen cloth was shipped undyed andundressed from 14th/15th century London to the nearby shores of the LowCountries, where it was considered indispensable.But the reach of Englishmaritime enterprise hardly extended beyond the seas of north-west Europe. Thecommercial route to Italy and the Mediterranean Sea normally lay throughAntwerp and over the Alps; any ships passing through the Strait of Gibraltar toor from England were likely to be Italian or Ragusan. Upon the re-opening ofthe Netherlands to English shipping in January 1565, there ensued a strongoutburst of commercial activity. The Royal Exchange was founded. Mercantilismgrew, and monopoly trading companies such as the East India Company wereestablished, with trade expanding to the New World. London became the principalNorth Sea port, with migrants arriving from England and abroad. The populationrose from an estimated 50,000 in 1530 to about 225,000 in 1605.In the 16thcentury William Shakespeare and his contemporaries lived in London at a time ofhostility to the development of the theatre. By the end of the Tudor period in1603, London was still very compact. There was an assassination attempt onJames I in Westminster, in the Gunpowder Plot on 5 November 1605.In the English Civil War the majority of Londoners supported the Parliamentary cause.After an initial advance by the Royalists in 1642, culminating in the battlesof Brentford and Turnham Green, London was surrounded by a defensive perimeterwall known as the Lines of Communication. The lines were built by up to 20,000people, and were completed in under two months. The fortifications failed theironly test when the New Model Army entered London in 1647, and they werelevelled by Parliament the same year.London was plagued by disease in the early17th century, culminating in the Great Plague of 1665–1666, which killed up to100,000 people, or a fifth of the population.The Great Fire of London broke out in 1666 in Pudding Lane in the city and quickly swept through the woodenbuildings. Rebuilding took over ten years and was supervised by Robert Hooke asSurveyor of London. In 1708 Christopher Wren's masterpiece, St Paul's Cathedralwas completed. During the Georgian era, new districts such as Mayfair wereformed in the west; new bridges over the Thames encouraged development in SouthLondon. In the east, the Port of London expanded downstream. London'sdevelopment as an international financial centre matured for much of the 1700s.In 1762, George III acquired Buckingham House and it was enlarged over the next75 years. During the 18th century, London was dogged by crime, and the BowStreet Runners were established in 1750 as a professional police force. Intotal, more than 200 offences were punishable by death, including petty theft.Most children born in the city died before reaching their third birthday.The coffeehouse became a popular place to debate ideas, with growing literacyand the development of the printing press making news widely available; andFleet Street became the centre of the British press. Following the invasion ofAmsterdam by Napoleonic armies, many financiers relocated to London, especiallya large Jewish community, and the first London internationalissue[clarification needed] was arranged in 1817. Around the same time, theRoyal Navy became the world leading war fleet[citation needed], acting as aserious deterrent to potential economic adversaries of the United Kingdom. Therepeal of the Corn Laws in 1846 was specifically aimed at weakening Dutcheconomic power[citation needed]. London then overtook Amsterdam as the leadinginternational financial centre[citation needed].In 1888, London became home to a series of murders by a man known only as Jack the Ripper and It has sincebecome one of the world's most famous unsolved mysteries. According to SamuelJohnson:  You find no man, at all intellectual, who is willing to leave London.No, Sir, when a man is tired of London, he is tired of life; for there is inLondon all that life can afford.— Samuel Johnson, 1777London was the world's largest city from about 1831 to 1925. London's overcrowded conditionsled to cholera epidemics, claiming 14,000 lives in 1848, and 6,000 in 1866.Rising traffic congestion led to the creation of the world's first local urbanrail network. The Metropolitan Board of Works oversaw infrastructure expansionin the capital and some of the surrounding counties; it was abolished in 1889when the London County Council was created out of those areas of the countiessurrounding the capital. London was bombed by the Germans during the FirstWorld War, and during the Second World War, the Blitz and other bombings by theGerman Luftwaffe killed over 30,000 Londoners, destroying large tracts ofhousing and other buildings across the city. Immediately after the war, the1948 Summer Olympics were held at the original Wembley Stadium, at a time whenLondon was still recovering from the war.From the 1940s onwards, London became home to a large number of immigrants, primarily from Commonwealthcountries such as Jamaica, India, Bangladesh and Pakistan, making London one ofthe most diverse cities worldwide. In 1951, the Festival of Britain was held onthe South Bank. The Great Smog of 1952 led to the Clean Air Act 1956, whichended the "pea soup fogs" for which London had been notorious.Primarilystarting in the mid-1960s, London became a centre for the worldwide youthculture, exemplified by the Swinging London subculture associated with theKing's Road, Chelsea and Carnaby Street. The role of trendsetter was revivedduring the punk era. In 1965 London's political boundaries were expanded totake into account the growth of the urban area and a new Greater London Councilwas created. During The Troubles in Northern Ireland, London was subjected tobombing attacks by the Provisional IRA. Racial inequality was highlighted bythe 1981 Brixton riot.Greater London's population declined steadily in thedecades after the Second World War, from an estimated peak of 8.6 million in1939 to around 6.8 million in the 1980s. The principal ports for London moveddownstream to Felixstowe and Tilbury,[citation needed] with the LondonDocklands area becoming a focus for regeneration, including the Canary Wharfdevelopment. This was borne out of London's ever-increasing role as a majorinternational financial centre during the 1980s. The Thames Barrier wascompleted in the 1980s to protect London against tidal surges from the NorthSea.From the 1970s, London became a common target of IRA terrorist attacks fortwo decades, starting with the Old Bailey bombing in 1973.The Greater London Council was abolished in 1986, which left London without a centraladministration until 2000 when London-wide government was restored, with thecreation of the Greater London Authority. To celebrate the start of the 21stcentury, the Millennium Dome, London Eye and Millennium Bridge wereconstructed. On 6 July 2005 London was awarded the 2012 Summer Olympics, makingLondon the first city to stage the Olympic Games three times. On 7 July 2005,three London Underground trains and a double-decker bus were bombed in a seriesof terrorist attacks.In 2008, London named alongside New York City and HongKong as Nylonkong, being hailed as the world's three most influential globalcities. In January 2015, Greater London's population was estimated to be 8.63million, the highest level since 1939. During the Brexit referendum in 2016,the UK as a whole decided to leave the European Union, but a majority of Londonconstituencies voted to remain in the EU.Suicides among youngsters between 10and 19 years old rose by 107% from 2013 to 2016.  Experts feel this is due toexcessive pressure in youngsters' environment and youngstersd in deprived areasfeel they have no future in terms of jobs or education.  Mental health servicesfor young people who need them are inadequate.  People should not generalize,people from a range of backgrounds can feel under pressure and suicidal for arange of reasons.The administration of London is formed of two tiers: a citywide,strategic tier and a local tier. Citywide administration iscoordinated by the Greater London Authority (GLA), while local administrationis carried out by 33 smaller authorities. The GLA consists of two electedcomponents: the Mayor of London, who has executive powers, and the LondonAssembly, which scrutinises the mayor's decisions and can accept or reject themayor's budget proposals each year. The headquarters of the GLA is City Hall,Southwark; the mayor is Sadiq Khan, the first Muslim mayor of a major Westerncapital. The mayor's statutory planning strategy is published as the LondonPlan, which was most recently revised in 2011. The local authorities are thecouncils of the 32 London boroughs and the City of London Corporation. They areresponsible for most local services, such as local planning, schools, socialservices, local roads and refuse collection. Certain functions, such as wastemanagement, are provided through joint arrangements. In 2009–2010 the combinedrevenue expenditure by London councils and the GLA amounted to just over £22billion (£14.7 billion for the boroughs and £7.4 billion for the GLA).TheLondon Fire Brigade is the statutory fire and rescue service for GreaterLondon. It is run by the London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority and isthe third largest fire service in the world. National Health Service ambulanceservices are provided by the London Ambulance Service (LAS) NHS Trust, thelargest free-at-the-point-of-use emergency ambulance service in the world. TheLondon Air Ambulance charity operates in conjunction with the LAS whererequired. Her Majesty's Coastguard and the Royal National Lifeboat Institutionoperate on the River Thames, which is under the jurisdiction of the Port ofLondon Authority from Teddington Lock to the sea.London is the seat of theGovernment of the United Kingdom. Many government departments, as well as thePrime Minister's residence at 10 Downing Street, are based close to the Palaceof Westminster, particularly along Whitehall. The British Parliament is oftenreferred to as the "Mother of Parliaments" (although this sobriquet was firstapplied to England itself, and not to Westminster, by John Bright) because ithas been a model for many other parliamentary systems. There are 73 Members ofParliament (MPs) from London, elected from local parliamentary constituenciesin the national Parliament. As of May 2015, 49 are from the Labour Party, 21are Conservatives, and three are Liberal Democrat.The UK government ministerialpost of Minister for London was created in 1994 and currently occupied by JoJohnson.Policing in Greater London, with the exception of the City ofLondon, is provided by the Metropolitan Police Service, overseen by the Mayorthrough the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime (MOPAC). The City of Londonhas its own police force – the City of London Police. The British TransportPolice are responsible for police services on National Rail, LondonUnderground, Docklands Light Railway and Tramlink services. A fourth policeforce in London, the Ministry of Defence Police, do not generally becomeinvolved with policing the general public. Crime rates vary widely by area,ranging from parts with serious issues to parts considered very safe. Todaycrime figures are made available nationally at Local Authority and Ward level.In 2015 there were 118 homicides, a 25.5% increase over 2014. The MetropolitanPolice have made detailed crime figures, broken down by category at borough andward level, available on their website since 2000.Recorded crime has beenrising in London, notably violent crime and murder by stabbing and other meanshave risen.  There have been 50 murders from the start of 2018 to mid April2018.  Funding cuts to the London police likely contributed to this thoughother factors are also involved.London, also referred to as GreaterLondon, is one of nine regions of England and the top-level subdivisioncovering most of the city's metropolis. The small ancient City of London at itscore once comprised the whole settlement, but as its urban area grew, theCorporation of London resisted attempts to amalgamate the city with itssuburbs, causing "London" to be defined in a number of ways for differentpurposes.Forty per cent of Greater London is covered by the London post town,within which 'LONDON' forms part of postal addresses. The London telephone areacode (020) covers a larger area, similar in size to Greater London, althoughsome outer districts are excluded and some places just outside are included.The Greater London boundary has been aligned to the M25 motorway inplaces.Outward urban expansion is now prevented by the Metropolitan Green Belt,although the built-up area extends beyond the boundary in places, resulting ina separately defined Greater London Urban Area. Beyond this is the vast Londoncommuter belt. Greater London is split for some purposes into Inner London andOuter London. The city is split by the River Thames into North and South, withan informal central London area in its interior. The coordinates of the nominalcentre of London, traditionally considered to be the original Eleanor Cross atCharing Cross near the junction of Trafalgar Square and Whitehall, are about51°30′26″N 00°07′39″W﻿ / ﻿51.50722°N 0.12750°W﻿ / 51.50722; -0.12750. Howeverthe geographical centre of London, on one definition, is in the London Boroughof Lambeth, just 0.1 miles to the northeast of Lambeth North tube station.Within London, both the City of London and the City of Westminster have citystatus and both the City of London and the remainder of Greater London arecounties for the purposes of lieutenancies. The area of Greater London hasincorporated areas that are part of the historic counties of Middlesex, Kent,Surrey, Essex and Hertfordshire. London's status as the capital of England, andlater the United Kingdom, has never been granted or confirmed officially—bystatute or in written form.Its position was formed through constitutionalconvention, making its status as de facto capital a part of the UK's unwrittenconstitution. The capital of England was moved to London from Winchester as thePalace of Westminster developed in the 12th and 13th centuries to become thepermanent location of the royal court, and thus the political capital of thenation. More recently, Greater London has been defined as a region of Englandand in this context is known as London.Greater London encompasses a totalarea of 1,583 square kilometres (611 sq mi), an area which had a population of7,172,036 in 2001 and a population density of 4,542 inhabitants per squarekilometre (11,760/sq mi). The extended area known as the London MetropolitanRegion or the London Metropolitan Agglomeration, comprises a total area of8,382 square kilometres (3,236 sq mi) has a population of 13,709,000 and apopulation density of 1,510 inhabitants per square kilometre (3,900/sq mi).Modern London stands on the Thames, its primary geographical feature, anavigable river which crosses the city from the south-west to the east. TheThames Valley is a floodplain surrounded by gently rolling hills includingParliament Hill, Addington Hills, and Primrose Hill. Historically London grewup at the lowest bridging point on the Thames. The Thames was once a muchbroader, shallower river with extensive marshlands; at high tide, its shoresreached five times their present width.Since the Victorian era the Thames hasbeen extensively embanked, and many of its London tributaries now flowunderground. The Thames is a tidal river, and London is vulnerable to flooding.The threat has increased over time because of a slow but continuous rise inhigh water level by the slow 'tilting' of Britain (up in the north and down inthe south) caused by post-glacial rebound.In 1974, a decade of work began onthe construction of the Thames Barrier across the Thames at Woolwich to dealwith this threat. While the barrier is expected to function as designed untilroughly 2070, concepts for its future enlargement or redesign are already beingdiscussed.London has a temperate oceanic climate (Köppen: Cfb ), similarto all of southern England. Despite its reputation as being a rainy city,London receives less precipitation in a year than Rome, Bordeaux, Lisbon,Naples, Sydney and New York City. Temperature extremes for all sites in theLondon area range from 38.1 °C (100.6 °F) at Kew during August 2003 down to−16.1 °C (3.0 °F) at Northolt during January 1962.Summers are generally warm.London's average July high is 24 °C (74 °F). On average London will see 31 daysabove 25 °C (77.0 °F) each year, and 4.2 days above 30.0 °C (86.0 °F) everyyear. During the 2003 European heat wave there were 14 consecutive days above30 °C (86.0 °F) and 2 consecutive days where temperatures reached 38 °C (100°F), leading to hundreds of heat related deaths.Winters are generally cool,cloudy and damp with little temperature variation. Snowfall occurs occasionallyand can cause travel disruption when this happens. Snowfall is more common inouter London. Spring and autumn are mixed seasons and can be pleasant. As alarge city, London has a considerable urban heat island effect, making thecentre of London at times 5 °C (9 °F) warmer than the suburbs and outskirts.The effect of this can be seen below when comparing London Heathrow, 15 miles(24 km) west of London, with the London Weather Centre, in the citycentre.London's vast urban area is often described using a set ofdistrict names, such as Bloomsbury, Mayfair, Wembley and Whitechapel. These areeither informal designations, reflect the names of villages that have beenabsorbed by sprawl, or are superseded administrative units such as parishes orformer boroughs. Such names have remained in use through tradition, eachreferring to a local area with its own distinctive character, but withoutofficial boundaries. Since 1965 Greater London has been divided into 32 Londonboroughs in addition to the ancient City of London. The City of London is themain financial district, and Canary Wharf has recently developed into a newfinancial and commercial hub in the Docklands to the east. The West End isLondon's main entertainment and shopping district, attracting tourists. WestLondon includes expensive residential areas where properties can sell for tensof millions of pounds. The average price for properties in Kensington andChelsea is over £2 million with a similarly high outlay in most of centralLondon.The East End is the area closest to the original Port of London, knownfor its high immigrant population, as well as for being one of the poorestareas in London. The surrounding East London area saw much of London's earlyindustrial development; now, brownfield sites throughout the area are beingredeveloped as part of the Thames Gateway including the London Riverside andLower Lea Valley, which was developed into the Olympic Park for the 2012Olympics and Paralympics.London's buildings are too diverse to becharacterised by any particular architectural style, partly because of theirvarying ages. Many grand houses and public buildings, such as the NationalGallery, are constructed from Portland stone. Some areas of the city,particularly those just west of the centre, are characterised by white stuccoor whitewashed buildings. Few structures in central London pre-date the GreatFire of 1666, these being a few trace Roman remains, the Tower of London and afew scattered Tudor survivors in the City. Further out is, for example, theTudor-period Hampton Court Palace, England's oldest surviving Tudor palace,built by Cardinal Thomas Wolsey c.1515.17th-century churches by Wren,neoclassical financial institutions such as the Royal Exchange and the Bank ofEngland, to the early 20th century Old Bailey and the 1960s Barbican Estateform part of the varied architectural heritage.The disused – but soonto be rejuvenated – 1939 Battersea Power Station by the river in the south-westis a local landmark, while some railway termini are excellent examples ofVictorian architecture, most notably St. Pancras and Paddington. The density ofLondon varies, with high employment density in the central area, highresidential densities in inner London, and lower densities in Outer London. TheMonument in the City of London provides views of the surrounding area whilecommemorating the Great Fire of London, which originated nearby. Marble Archand Wellington Arch, at the north and south ends of Park Lane, respectively,have royal connections, as do the Albert Memorial and Royal Albert Hall inKensington. Nelson's Column is a nationally recognised monument in TrafalgarSquare, one of the focal points of central London. Older buildings are mainlybrick built, most commonly the yellow London stock brick or a warm orange-redvariety, often decorated with carvings and white plaster mouldings.In the denseareas, most of the concentration is via medium- and high-rise buildings.London's skyscrapers, such as 30 St Mary Axe, Tower 42, the Broadgate Tower andOne Canada Square, are mostly in the two financial districts, the City ofLondon and Canary Wharf. High-rise development is restricted at certain sitesif it would obstruct protected views of St Paul's Cathedral and other historicbuildings. Nevertheless, there are a number of very tall skyscrapers in centralLondon (see Tall buildings in London), including the 95-storey Shard LondonBridge, the tallest building in the European Union. Other notable modernbuildings include City Hall in Southwark with its distinctive oval shape andthe British Library in Somers Town/Kings Cross. What was formerly theMillennium Dome, by the Thames to the east of Canary Wharf, is now anentertainment venue called the O2 Arena.The London Natural History Society suggest that London is "one of the World'sGreenest Cities" with more than 40 percent green space or open water. Theyindicate that 2000 species of flowering plant have been found growing there andthat the tidal Thames supports 120 species of fish. They also state that over60 species of bird nest in central London and that their members have recorded47 species of butterfly, 1173 moths and more than 270 kinds of spider aroundLondon. London's wetland areas support nationally important populations of manywater birds. London has 38 Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), twoNational Nature Reserves and 76 Local Nature Reserves.Amphibians are common inthe capital, including smooth newts living by the Tate Modern, and commonfrogs, common toads, palmate newts and great crested newts. On the other hand,native reptiles such as slowworms, common lizards, grass snakes and adders, aremostly only seen in Outer London.Among other inhabitants of London are10,000 red foxes, so that there are now 16 foxes for every square mile (2.6square kilometres) of London. These urban foxes are noticeably bolder thantheir country cousins, sharing the pavement with pedestrians and raising cubsin people's backyards. Foxes have even sneaked into the Houses of Parliament,where one was found asleep on a filing cabinet. Another broke into the groundsof Buckingham Palace, reportedly killing some of Queen Elizabeth II's prizedpink flamingos. Generally, however, foxes and city folk appear to get along. Asurvey in 2001 by the London-based Mammal Society found that 80 percent of3,779 respondents who volunteered to keep a diary of garden mammal visits likedhaving them around. This sample cannot be taken to represent Londoners as awhole.Other mammals found in Greater London are hedgehogs, rats, mice, rabbit,shrew, vole, and squirrels, In wilder areas of Outer London, such as EppingForest, a wide variety of mammals are found including hare, badger, field, bankand water vole, wood mouse, yellow-necked mouse, mole, shrew, and weasel, inaddition to fox, squirrel and hedgehog. A dead otter was found at The Highway,in Wapping, about a mile from the Tower Bridge, which would suggest that theyhave begun to move back after being absent a hundred years from the city. Tenof England's eighteen species of bats have been recorded in Epping Forest:soprano, nathusius and common pipistrelles, noctule, serotine, barbastelle,daubenton's, brown Long-eared, natterer's and leisler's.Among the strangesights seen in London have been a whale in the Thames, while the BBC Twoprogramme "Natural World: Unnatural History of London" shows pigeons using theLondon Underground to get around the city, a seal that takes fish fromfishmongers outside Billingsgate Fish Market, and foxes that will "sit" ifgiven sausages.Herds of red and fallow deer also roam freely within much ofRichmond and Bushy Park. A cull takes place each November and February toensure numbers can be sustained. Epping Forest is also known for its fallowdeer, which can frequently be seen in herds to the north of the Forest. A rarepopulation of melanistic, black fallow deer is also maintained at the DeerSanctuary near Theydon Bois. Muntjac deer, which escaped from deer parks at theturn of the twentieth century, are also found in the forest. While Londonersare accustomed to wildlife such as birds and foxes sharing the city, morerecently urban deer have started becoming a regular feature, and whole herds offallow deer come into residential areas at night to take advantage of London'sgreen spaces.London maps showing the percentage distribution of selectedraces according to the 2011 Census The 2011 census recorded that 2,998,264people or 36.7% of London's population are foreign-born making London the citywith the second largest immigrant population, behind New York City, in terms ofabsolute numbers. About 69% of children born in London in 2015 had at least oneparent who was born abroad. The table to the right shows the most commoncountries of birth of London residents. Note that some of the German-bornpopulation, in 18th position, are British citizens from birth born to parentsserving in the British Armed Forces in Germany.With increasingindustrialisation, London's population grew rapidly throughout the 19th andearly 20th centuries, and it was for some time in the late 19th and early 20thcenturies the most populous city in the world. Its population peaked at8,615,245 in 1939 immediately before the outbreak of the Second World War, buthad declined to 7,192,091 at the 2001 Census. However, the population then grewby just over a million between the 2001 and 2011 Censuses, to reach 8,173,941in the latter enumeration.However, London's continuous urban area extendsbeyond the borders of Greater London and was home to 9,787,426 people in 2011,while its wider metropolitan area has a population of between 12 and 14 milliondepending on the definition used. According to Eurostat, London is the mostpopulous city and metropolitan area of the European Union and the second mostpopulous in Europe. During the period 1991–2001 a net 726,000 immigrantsarrived in London.The region covers an area of 1,579 square kilometres (610 sqmi). The population density is 5,177 inhabitants per square kilometre(13,410/sq mi), more than ten times that of any other British region. In termsof population, London is the 19th largest city and the 18th largestmetropolitan region in the world. As of  2014[update], London has the largestnumber of billionaires (British Pound Sterling) in the world, with 72 residingin the city. London ranks as one of the most expensive cities in the world,alongside Tokyo and Moscow.According to the Office for National Statistics, based on the 2011 Censusestimates, 59.8 per cent of the 8,173,941 inhabitants of London were White,with 44.9 per cent White British, 2.2 per cent White Irish, 0.1 per centgypsy/Irish traveller and 12.1 per cent classified as Other White. 20.9 percent of Londoners are of Asian and mixed-Asian descent. 19.7 per cent are offull Asian descent, with those of mixed-Asian heritage comprising 1.2 of thepopulation. Indians account for 6.6 per cent of the population, followed byPakistanis and Bangladeshis at 2.7 per cent each. Chinese peoples account for1.5 per cent of the population, with Arabs comprising 1.3 per cent. A further4.9 per cent are classified as "Other Asian". 15.6 per cent of London'spopulation are of Black and mixed-Black descent. 13.3 per cent are of fullBlack descent, with those of mixed-Black heritage comprising 2.3 per cent.Black Africans account for 7.0 per cent of London's population, with 4.2 percent as Black Caribbean and 2.1 per cent as "Other Black". 5.0 per cent are ofmixed race. Across London, Black and Asian children outnumber White Britishchildren by about six to four in state schools. Altogether at the 2011 census,of London's 1,624,768 population aged 0 to 15, 46.4 per cent were White, 19.8per cent were Asian, 19 per cent were Black, 10.8 per cent were Mixed and 4 percent represented another ethnic group. In January 2005, a survey of London'sethnic and religious diversity claimed that there were more than 300 languagesspoken in London and more than 50 non-indigenous communities with a populationof more than 10,000. Figures from the Office for National Statistics show that,in 2010[update], London's foreign-born population was 2,650,000 (33 per cent),up from 1,630,000 in 1997. The 2011 census showed that 36.7 per cent of GreaterLondon's population were born outside the UK. A portion of the German-bornpopulation are likely to be British nationals born to parents serving in theBritish Armed Forces in Germany. Estimates produced by the Office for NationalStatistics indicate that the five largest foreign-born groups living in Londonin the period July 2009 to June 2010 were those born in India, Poland, theRepublic of Ireland, Bangladesh and Nigeria.According to the 2011Census, the largest religious groupings are Christians (48.4 per cent),followed by those of no religion (20.7 per cent), Muslims (12.4 per cent), noresponse (8.5 per cent), Hindus (5.0 per cent), Jews (1.8 per cent), Sikhs (1.5per cent), Buddhists (1.0 per cent) and other (0.6 per cent). London hastraditionally been Christian, and has a large number of churches, particularlyin the City of London. The well-known St Paul's Cathedral in the City andSouthwark Cathedral south of the river are Anglican administrative centres,while the Archbishop of Canterbury, principal bishop of the Church of Englandand worldwide Anglican Communion, has his main residence at Lambeth Palace inthe London Borough of Lambeth.Important national and royal ceremonies areshared between St Paul's and Westminster Abbey. The Abbey is not to be confusedwith nearby Westminster Cathedral, which is the largest Roman Catholiccathedral in England and Wales. Despite the prevalence of Anglican churches,observance is very low within the Anglican denomination. Church attendancecontinues on a long, slow, steady decline, according to Church of Englandstatistics.London is also home to sizeable Muslim, Hindu, Sikh, and Jewishcommunities. Notable mosques include the East London Mosque in Tower Hamlets,London Central Mosque on the edge of Regent's Park and the Baitul Futuh Mosqueof the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. Following the oil boom, increasing numbersof wealthy Hindus and Middle-Eastern Muslims have based themselves aroundMayfair and Knightsbridge in West London. There are large Muslim communities inthe eastern boroughs of Tower Hamlets and Newham. Large Hindu communities arein the north-western boroughs of Harrow and Brent, the latter of which is hometo Europe's largest Hindu temple, Neasden Temple. London is also home to 42Hindu temples. There are Sikh communities in East and West London, particularlyin Southall, home to one of the largest Sikh populations and the largest Sikhtemple outside India.The majority of British Jews live in London, withsignificant Jewish communities in Stamford Hill, Stanmore, Golders Green,Finchley, Hampstead, Hendon and Edgware in North London. Bevis Marks Synagoguein the City of London is affiliated to London's historic Sephardic Jewishcommunity. It is the only synagogue in Europe which has held regular servicescontinuously for over 300 years. Stanmore and Canons Park Synagogue has thelargest membership of any single Orthodox synagogue in the whole of Europe,overtaking Ilford synagogue (also in London) in 1998. The community set up theLondon Jewish Forum in 2006 in response to the growing significance of devolvedLondon Government.  There are many accents traditionally associated withLondon. The most well known of the London accents long ago acquired the Cockneylabel from London's East End, which is heard both in London itself, and acrossthe wider South East England region more generally. The accent of a21st-century Londoner varies widely; what is becoming more and more commonamongst the under-30s however is some fusion of Cockney with a whole array ofethnic accents, in particular Caribbean, which form an accent labelledMulticultural London English (MLE). The other widely heard and spoken accent isRP (Received Pronunciation) in various forms, which can often be heard in themedia and many of other traditional professions and beyond, although thisaccent is not limited to London and South East England, and can also be heardselectively throughout the whole UK amongst certain social groupings. Since theturn of the century the Cockney dialect is less common in the East End and has'migrated' east to Havering and the county of Essex.London produced in2015 about £378 billion (€530 billion or $600 billion), over 22% of UK GDP,while the economy of the London metropolitan area—the largest inEurope—generates about 30 per cent of the UK's GDP (or an estimated $669billion in 2005). London has five major business districts: the City,Westminster, Canary Wharf, Camden & Islington and Lambeth & Southwark. One wayto get an idea of their relative importance is to look at relative amounts ofoffice space: Greater London had 27 million m2 of office space in 2001, and theCity contains the most space, with 8 million m2 of office space. London hassome of the highest real estate prices in the world. London is the world's mostexpensive office market for the last three years according to world propertyjournal (2015) report. As of  2015[update] the residential property in Londonis worth $2.2 trillion – same value as that of Brazil annual GDP. The city hasthe highest property prices of any European city according to the Office forNational Statistics and the European Office of Statistics. On average the priceper square metre in central London is €24,252 (April 2014). This is higher thanthe property prices in other G8 European capital cities; Berlin €3,306, Rome€6,188 and Paris €11,229.London finance industry is based in the City ofLondon and Canary Wharf, the two major Central Business Districts in London.London is one of the pre-eminent financial centres of the world as the mostimportant location for international finance. London took over as a majorfinancial centre shortly after 1795 when the Dutch Republic collapsed beforethe Napoleonic armies. For many bankers established in Amsterdam (e.g. Hope,Baring), this was only time to move to London. The London financial elite wasstrengthened by a strong Jewish community from all over Europe capable ofmastering the most sophisticated financial tools of the time. This uniqueconcentration of talents accelerated the transition from the CommercialRevolution to the Industrial Revolution. By the end of the 19th century,Britain was the wealthiest of all nations, and London a leading financialcentre. Still, as of 2016 London tops the world rankings on the GlobalFinancial Centres Index (GFCI), and it ranked second in A.T. Kearney's 2018Global Cities Index.London's largest industry is finance, and its financialexports make it a large contributor to the UK's balance of payments. Around325,000 people were employed in financial services in London until mid-2007.London has over 480 overseas banks, more than any other city in the world. Itis also the world's biggest currency trading centre, accounting for some 37percent of the $5.1 trillion average daily volume, according to the BIS. Over85 percent (3.2 million) of the employed population of greater London works inthe services industries. Because of its prominent global role, London's economyhad been affected by the financial crisis of 2007–2008. However, by 2010 theCity has recovered; put in place new regulatory powers, proceeded to regainlost ground and re-established London's economic dominance. Along withprofessional services headquarters, the City of London is home to the Bank ofEngland, London Stock Exchange, and Lloyd's of London insurance market. Overhalf of the UK's top 100 listed companies (the FTSE 100) and over 100 ofEurope's 500 largest companies have their headquarters in central London. Over70 per cent of the FTSE 100 are within London's metropolitan area, and 75 percent of Fortune 500 companies have offices in London.  Media companies areconcentrated in London and the media distribution industry is London's secondmost competitive sector. The BBC is a significant employer, while otherbroadcasters also have headquarters around the City. Many national newspapersare edited in London. London is a major retail centre and in 2010 had thehighest non-food retail sales of any city in the world, with a total spend ofaround £64.2 billion. The Port of London is the second-largest in the UnitedKingdom, handling 45 million tonnes of cargo each year.A growing number oftechnology companies are based in London notably in East London Tech City, alsoknown as Silicon Roundabout. In April 2014, the city was among the first toreceive a geoTLD. In February 2014 London was ranked as the European City ofthe Future  in the 2014/15 list by FDi Magazine.The gas and electricitydistribution networks that manage and operate the towers, cables and pressuresystems that deliver energy to consumers across the city are managed byNational Grid plc, SGN and UK Power Networks.London is one of the leadingtourist destinations in the world and in 2015 was ranked as the most visitedcity in the world with over 65 million visits. It is also the top city in theworld by visitor cross-border spending, estimated at US$20.23 billion in 2015.Tourism is one of London's prime industries, employing the equivalent of350,000 full-time workers in 2003, and the city accounts for 54% of all inboundvisitor spending in the UK. As of  2016[update] London is the world top citydestination as ranked by TripAdvisor users.In 2015 the top most-visitedattractions in the UK were all in London. The top 10 most visited attractionswere: (with visits per venue)The British Museum: 6,820,686 The NationalGallery: 5,908,254 The Natural History Museum (South Kensington): 5,284,023 TheSouthbank Centre: 5,102,883 Tate Modern: 4,712,581 The Victoria and AlbertMuseum (South Kensington): 3,432,325 The Science Museum: 3,356,212 SomersetHouse: 3,235,104 The Tower of London: 2,785,249 The National Portrait Gallery:2,145,486The number of hotel rooms in London in 2015 stood at 138,769, and isexpected to grow over the years.Transport is one of the four main areasof policy administered by the Mayor of London, however the mayor's financialcontrol does not extend to the longer distance rail network that enters London.In 2007 he assumed responsibility for some local lines, which now form theLondon Overground network, adding to the existing responsibility for the LondonUnderground, trams and buses. The public transport network is administered byTransport for London (TFL). The lines that formed the London Underground, aswell as trams and buses, became part of an integrated transport system in 1933when the London Passenger Transport Board or London Transport was created.Transport for London is now the statutory corporation responsible for mostaspects of the transport system in Greater London, and is run by a board and acommissioner appointed by the Mayor of London.London is a majorinternational air transport hub with the busiest city airspace in the world.Eight airports use the word London in their name, but most traffic passesthrough six of these. Additionally, various other airports also serve London,catering primarily to general aviation flights.  London Heathrow Airport, inHillingdon, West London, was for many years the busiest airport in the worldfor international traffic, and is the major hub of the nation's flag carrier,British Airways.  In March 2008 its fifth terminal was opened. In 2014, Dubaigained from Heathrow the leading position in terms of international passengertraffic. London Gatwick Airport, south of London in West Sussex, handlesflights to more destinations than any other UK airport and is the main base ofeasyJet, the UK's largest airline by number of passengers. London StanstedAirport, north-east of London in Essex, has flights that serve the greatestnumber of European destinations of any UK airport and is the main base ofRyanair, the world's largest international airline by number of internationalpassengers. London Luton Airport, to the north of London in Bedfordshire, isused by several budget airlines for short-haul flights. London City Airport,the most central airport and the one with the shortest runway, in Newham, EastLondon, is focused on business travellers, with a mixture of full-serviceshort-haul scheduled flights and considerable business jet traffic. LondonSouthend Airport, east of London in Essex, is a smaller, regional airport thatcaters for short-haul flights on a limited, though growing, number of airlines.In 2017, international passengers made up over 95% of the total at Southend,the highest proportion of any London airport.The London Underground,commonly referred to as the Tube, is the oldest and third longest metro systemin the world. The system serves 270 stations and was formed from severalprivate companies, including the world's first underground electric line, theCity and South London Railway. It dates from 1863.Over four million journeysare made every day on the Underground network, over 1 billion each year. Aninvestment programme is attempting to reduce congestion and improvereliability, including £6.5 billion (€7.7 billion) spent before the 2012 SummerOlympics. The Docklands Light Railway (DLR), which opened in 1987, is a second,more local metro system using smaller and lighter tram-type vehicles that servethe Docklands, Greenwich and Lewisham.There are more than 360 railwaystations in the London Travelcard Zones on an extensive above-ground suburbanrailway network. South London, particularly, has a high concentration ofrailways as it has fewer Underground lines. Most rail lines terminate aroundthe centre of London, running into eighteen terminal stations, with theexception of the Thameslink trains connecting Bedford in the north and Brightonin the south via Luton and Gatwick airports. London has Britain's busieststation by number of passengers – Waterloo, with over 184 million people usingthe interchange station complex (which includes Waterloo East station) eachyear. Clapham Junction is the busiest station in Europe by the number of trainspassing. With the need for more rail capacity in London, Crossrail is due toopen in 2018. It will be a new railway line running east to west through Londonand into the Home Counties with a branch to Heathrow Airport. It is Europe'sbiggest construction project, with a £15 billion projected cost.London is the centre of the National Rail network, with 70 percent of rail journeysstarting or ending in London. Like suburban rail services, regional andinter-city trains depart from several termini around the city centre, linkingLondon with the rest of Britain including Birmingham, Brighton, Reading,Bristol, Cardiff, Derby, Exeter, Sheffield, Southampton, Leeds, Liverpool,Manchester, Cambridge, Newcastle upon Tyne, Edinburgh and Glasgow. Someinternational railway services to Continental Europe were operated during the20th century as boat trains, such as the Admiraal de Ruijter to Amsterdam andthe Night Ferry to Paris and Brussels. The opening of the Channel Tunnel in1994 connected London directly to the continental rail network, allowingEurostar services to begin. Since 2007, high-speed trains link St. PancrasInternational with Lille, Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam and other European touristdestinations via the High Speed 1 rail link and the Channel Tunnel. The firsthigh-speed domestic trains started in June 2009 linking Kent to London. Thereare plans for a second high speed line linking London to the Midlands, NorthWest England, and Yorkshire.Although rail freight levels are far downcompared to their height, significant quantities of cargo are also carried intoand out of London by rail; chiefly building materials and landfill waste. As amajor hub of the British railway network, London's tracks also carry largeamounts of freight for the other regions, such as container freight from theChannel Tunnel and English Channel ports, and nuclear waste for reprocessing atSellafield.London's bus network is one of the largest in the world,running 24 hours a day, with about 8,500 buses, more than 700 bus routes andaround 19,500 bus stops. In 2013, the network had more than 2 billion commutertrips per annum, more than the Underground. Around £850 million is taken inrevenue each year. London has the largest wheelchair accessible network in theworld and, from the 3rd quarter of 2007, became more accessible to hearing andvisually impaired passengers as audio-visual announcements were introduced. Thedistinctive red double-decker buses are an internationally recognised trademarkof London transport along with black cabs and the Tube.London has a modern tramnetwork, known as Tramlink, centred on Croydon in South London. The network has39 stops and four routes, and carried 28 million people in 2013. Since June2008 Transport for London has completely owned Tramlink, and it plans to spend£54m by 2015 on maintenance, renewals, upgrades and capacity enhancements.London's first and only cable car, known as the Emirates Air Line, opened inJune 2012. Crossing the River Thames, linking Greenwich Peninsula and the RoyalDocks in the east of the city, the cable car is integrated with London's OysterCard ticketing system, although special fares are charged. Costing £60 millionto build, it carries over 3,500 passengers every day, although this is verymuch lower than its capacity. Similar to the Santander Cycles bike hire scheme,the cable car is sponsored in a 10-year deal by the airline Emirates.In the whole Greater London Area, around 650,000 people use a bike everyday.But out of a total population of around 8.8 million , this means that justaround 7% of Greater London's population use a bike on an average day. This isa small proportion, when compared to many other cities in the world  A reasonmay well be the poor investments for cycling in the UK. In England, cyclinginvestment equates to around £1.40 per person and year, which can be comparedto £22 in the Netherlands.Cycling is nevertheless becoming increasingly popularway to get around London. The launch of a cycle hire scheme in July 2010 hasbeen successful and generally well received. The London Cycling Campaignlobbies for better provision. There are many cycle routes in London, includingseveral Cycle Superhighways.From being the largest port in the world, thePort of London is now only the second-largest in the United Kingdom, handling45 million tonnes of cargo each year. Most of this actually passes through thePort of Tilbury, outside the boundary of Greater London. London has frequentriver boat services on the Thames known as Thames Clippers. These run up toevery 20 minutes between Embankment Pier and North Greenwich Pier. The WoolwichFerry, with 2.5 million passengers every year, is a frequent service linkingthe North and South Circular Roads. Other operators run both commuter andtourist boat services in London.Although the majority of journeysinvolving central London are made by public transport, car travel is common inthe suburbs. The inner ring road (around the city centre), the North and SouthCircular roads (in the suburbs), and the outer orbital motorway (the M25,outside the built-up area) encircle the city and are intersected by a number ofbusy radial routes—but very few motorways penetrate into inner London. A planfor a comprehensive network of motorways throughout the city (the RingwaysPlan) was prepared in the 1960s but was mostly cancelled in the early 1970s.The M25 is the second-longest ring-road motorway in Europe at 117 mi (188 km)long. The A1 and M1 connect London to Leeds, and Newcastle and Edinburgh.London is notorious for its traffic congestion, with the average speed of a carin the rush hour being 10.6 mph (17.1 km/h).In 2003, a congestion charge wasintroduced to reduce traffic volumes in the city centre. With a few exceptions,motorists are required to pay £10 per day to drive within a defined zoneencompassing much of central London. Motorists who are residents of the definedzone can buy a greatly reduced season pass. London government initiallyexpected the Congestion Charge Zone to increase daily peak period Undergroundand bus users by 20,000 people, reduce road traffic by 10 to 15 per cent,increase traffic speeds by 10 to 15 per cent, and reduce queues by 20 to 30 percent. Over the course of several years, the average number of cars entering thecentre of London on a weekday was reduced from 195,000 to 125,000 cars – a35-per-cent reduction of vehicles driven per day.London is a majorglobal centre of higher education teaching and research and has the largestconcentration of higher education institutes in Europe. According to the QSWorld University Rankings 2015/16, London has the greatest concentration of topclass universities in the world and its international student population ofaround 110,000 is larger than any other city in the world. A 2014PricewaterhouseCoopers report termed London as the global capital of highereducation.A number of world-leading education institutions are based in London.In the 2014/15 QS World University Rankings, Imperial College London is rankedjoint 2nd in the world, University College London (UCL) is ranked 5th, andKing's College London (KCL) is ranked 16th. The London School of Economics hasbeen described as the world's leading social science institution for bothteaching and research. The London Business School is considered one of theworld's leading business schools and in 2015 its MBA programme was rankedsecond best in the world by the Financial Times.With 120,000 students inLondon, the federal University of London is the largest contact teachinguniversity in the UK. It includes five multi-faculty universities – City,King's College London, Queen Mary, Royal Holloway and UCL – and a number ofsmaller and more specialised institutions including Birkbeck, the CourtauldInstitute of Art, Goldsmiths, Guildhall School of Music and Drama, the LondonBusiness School, the London School of Economics, the London School of Hygiene &Tropical Medicine, the Royal Academy of Music, the Central School of Speech andDrama, the Royal Veterinary College and the School of Oriental and AfricanStudies. Members of the University of London have their own admissionsprocedures, and some award their own degrees. A number of universities inLondon are outside the University of London system, including BrunelUniversity, Imperial College London, Kingston University, London MetropolitanUniversity, University of East London, University of West London, University ofWestminster, London South Bank University, Middlesex University, and Universityof the Arts London (the largest university of art, design, fashion,communication and the performing arts in Europe). In addition there are threeinternational universities in London – Regent's University London, Richmond,The American International University in London and Schiller InternationalUniversity.London is home to five major medical schools – Barts and TheLondon School of Medicine and Dentistry (part of Queen Mary), King's CollegeLondon School of Medicine (the largest medical school in Europe), ImperialCollege School of Medicine, UCL Medical School and St George's, University ofLondon – and has a large number of affiliated teaching hospitals. It is also amajor centre for biomedical research, and three of the UK's eight academichealth science centres are based in the city – Imperial College Healthcare,King's Health Partners and UCL Partners (the largest such centre in Europe).There are a number of business schools in London, including the London Schoolof Business and Finance, Cass Business School (part of City University London),Hult International Business School, ESCP Europe, European Business SchoolLondon, Imperial College Business School, the London Business School and theUCL School of Management. London is also home to many specialist arts educationinstitutions, including the Academy of Live and Recorded Arts, Central Schoolof Ballet, LAMDA, London College of Contemporary Arts (LCCA), LondonContemporary Dance School, National Centre for Circus Arts, RADA, RambertSchool of Ballet and Contemporary Dance, the Royal College of Art, the RoyalCollege of Music and Trinity Laban.The majority of primary and secondaryschools and further-education colleges in London are controlled by the Londonboroughs or otherwise state-funded; leading examples include City and IslingtonCollege, Ealing, Hammersmith and West London College, Leyton Sixth FormCollege, Tower Hamlets College, Bethnal Green Academy and Newham College. Thereare also a number of private schools and colleges in London, some old andfamous, such as City of London School, Harrow, St Paul's School, Haberdashers'Aske's Boys' School, University College School, The John Lyon School, HighgateSchool and Westminster School.Leisure is a major part of the Londoneconomy, with a 2003 report attributing a quarter of the entire UK leisureeconomy to London at 25.6 events per 1000 people. Globally, the city is amongstthe big four fashion capitals of the world, and according to officialstatistics, London is the world's third busiest film production centre,presents more live comedy than any other city, and has the biggest theatreaudience of any city in the world.Within the City of Westminster in London,the entertainment district of the West End has its focus around LeicesterSquare, where London and world film premieres are held, and Piccadilly Circus,with its giant electronic advertisements. London's theatre district is here, asare many cinemas, bars, clubs, and restaurants, including the city's Chinatowndistrict (in Soho), and just to the east is Covent Garden, an area housingspeciality shops. The city is the home of Andrew Lloyd Webber, whose musicalshave dominated the West End theatre since the late 20th century. The UnitedKingdom's Royal Ballet, English National Ballet, Royal Opera, and EnglishNational Opera are based in London and perform at the Royal Opera House, theLondon Coliseum, Sadler's Wells Theatre, and the Royal Albert Hall, as well astouring the country.Islington's 1 mile (1.6 km) long Upper Street,extending northwards from Angel, has more bars and restaurants than any otherstreet in the United Kingdom. Europe's busiest shopping area is Oxford Street,a shopping street nearly 1 mile (1.6 km) long, making it the longest shoppingstreet in the UK. Oxford Street is home to vast numbers of retailers anddepartment stores, including the world-famous Selfridges flagship store.Knightsbridge, home to the equally renowned Harrods department store, lies tothe south-west. London is home to designers Vivienne Westwood, Galliano, StellaMcCartney, Manolo Blahnik, and Jimmy Choo, among others; its renowned art andfashion schools make it an international centre of fashion alongside Paris,Milan, and New York City. London offers a great variety of cuisine as a resultof its ethnically diverse population. Gastronomic centres include theBangladeshi restaurants of Brick Lane and the Chinese restaurants ofChinatown.There is a variety of annual events, beginning with therelatively new New Year's Day Parade, a fireworks display at the London Eye;the world's second largest street party, the Notting Hill Carnival, is held onthe late August Bank Holiday each year. Traditional parades include November'sLord Mayor's Show, a centuries-old event celebrating the annual appointment ofa new Lord Mayor of the City of London with a procession along the streets ofthe City, and June's Trooping the Colour, a formal military pageant performedby regiments of the Commonwealth and British armies to celebrate the Queen'sOfficial Birthday.London has been the setting for many works ofliterature. The pilgrims in Geoffrey Chaucer's late 14th-century CanterburyTales set out for Canterbury from London – specifically, from the Tabard inn,Southwark. William Shakespeare spent a large part of his life living andworking in London; his contemporary Ben Jonson was also based there, and someof his work, most notably his play The Alchemist, was set in the city. AJournal of the Plague Year (1722) by Daniel Defoe is a fictionalisation of theevents of the 1665 Great Plague.The literary centres of London havetraditionally been hilly Hampstead and (since the early 20th century)Bloomsbury. Writers closely associated with the city are the diarist SamuelPepys, noted for his eyewitness account of the Great Fire, Charles Dickens,whose representation of a foggy, snowy, grimy London of street sweepers andpickpockets has been a major influence on people's vision of early VictorianLondon, and Virginia Woolf, regarded as one of the foremost modernist literaryfigures of the 20th century. Later important depictions of London from the 19thand early 20th centuries are Dickens' novels, and Arthur Conan Doyle's SherlockHolmes stories. Also of significance is Letitia Elizabeth Landon's Calendar ofthe London Seasons (1834). Modern writers pervasively influenced by the cityinclude Peter Ackroyd, author of a "biography" of London, and Iain Sinclair,who writes in the genre of psychogeography.London has played a significantrole in the film industry. Major studios within or bordering London includeTwickenham, Ealing, Shepperton, Pinewood, Elstree and Borehamwood, and aspecial effects and post-production community centred in Soho. Working TitleFilms has its headquarters in London. London has been the setting for filmsincluding Oliver Twist (1948), Scrooge (1951), Peter Pan (1953), The 101Dalmatians (1961), My Fair Lady (1964), Mary Poppins (1964), Blowup (1966), TheLong Good Friday (1980), Notting Hill (1999), Love Actually (2003), V ForVendetta (2005), Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber Of Fleet Street (2008) and TheKing's Speech (2010). Notable actors and filmmakers from London include;Charlie Chaplin, Alfred Hitchcock, Michael Caine, Helen Mirren, Gary Oldman,Christopher Nolan, Jude Law, Benedict Cumberbatch, Tom Hardy, Keira Knightleyand Daniel Day-Lewis. As of  2008[update], the British Academy Film Awards havetaken place at the Royal Opera House. London is a major centre for televisionproduction, with studios including BBC Television Centre, The Fountain Studiosand The London Studios. Many television programmes have been set in London,including the popular television soap opera EastEnders, broadcast by the BBCsince 1985.London is home to many museums, galleries, and otherinstitutions, many of which are free of admission charges and are major touristattractions as well as playing a research role. The first of these to beestablished was the British Museum in Bloomsbury, in 1753. Originallycontaining antiquities, natural history specimens, and the national library,the museum now has 7 million artefacts from around the globe. In 1824, theNational Gallery was founded to house the British national collection ofWestern paintings; this now occupies a prominent position in Trafalgar Square.In the latter half of the 19th century the locale of South Kensington wasdeveloped as "Albertopolis", a cultural and scientific quarter. Three majornational museums are there: the Victoria and Albert Museum (for the appliedarts), the Natural History Museum, and the Science Museum. The NationalPortrait Gallery was founded in 1856 to house depictions of figures fromBritish history; its holdings now comprise the world's most extensivecollection of portraits. The national gallery of British art is at TateBritain, originally established as an annexe of the National Gallery in 1897.The Tate Gallery, as it was formerly known, also became a major centre formodern art; in 2000, this collection moved to Tate Modern, a new gallery housedin the former Bankside Power Station.London is one of the major classicaland popular music capitals of the world and hosts major music corporations,such as Universal Music Group International and Warner Music Group, as well ascountless bands, musicians and industry professionals. The city is also home tomany orchestras and concert halls, such as the Barbican Arts Centre (principalbase of the London Symphony Orchestra and the London Symphony Chorus), CadoganHall (Royal Philharmonic Orchestra) and the Royal Albert Hall (The Proms).London's two main opera houses are the Royal Opera House and the LondonColiseum. The UK's largest pipe organ is at the Royal Albert Hall. Othersignificant instruments are at the cathedrals and major churches. Severalconservatoires are within the city: Royal Academy of Music, Royal College ofMusic, Guildhall School of Music and Drama and Trinity Laban.London has numerous venues for rock and pop concerts, including the world's busiest arenathe O2 arena and other large arenas such as Earls Court, Wembley Arena, as wellas many mid-sized venues, such as Brixton Academy, the Hammersmith Apollo andthe Shepherd's Bush Empire. Several music festivals, including the WirelessFestival, South West Four, Lovebox, and Hyde Park's British Summer Time are allheld in London. The city is home to the original Hard Rock Cafe and the AbbeyRoad Studios, where The Beatles recorded many of their hits. In the 1960s,1970s and 1980s, musicians and groups like Elton John, Pink Floyd, CliffRichard, David Bowie, Queen, The Kinks, The Rolling Stones, The Who, EricClapton, Led Zeppelin, The Small Faces, Iron Maiden, Fleetwood Mac, ElvisCostello, Cat Stevens, The Police, The Cure, Madness, The Jam, Ultravox,Spandau Ballet, Culture Club, Dusty Springfield, Phil Collins, Rod Stewart,Adam Ant, Status Quo and Sade, derived their sound from the streets and rhythmsof London.London was instrumental in the development of punk music, withfigures such as the Sex Pistols, The Clash, and Vivienne Westwood all based inthe city. More recent artists to emerge from the London music scene includeGeorge Michael's Wham!, Kate Bush, Seal, the Pet Shop Boys, Bananarama,Siouxsie and the Banshees, Bush, the Spice Girls, Jamiroquai, Blur, McFly, TheProdigy, Gorillaz, Bloc Party, Mumford & Sons, Coldplay, Amy Winehouse, Adele,Sam Smith, Ed Sheeran, Paloma Faith, Ellie Goulding, One Direction and Florenceand the Machine. London is also a centre for urban music. In particular thegenres UK garage, drum and bass, dubstep and grime evolved in the city from theforeign genres of hip hop and reggae, alongside local drum and bass. Musicstation BBC Radio 1Xtra was set up to support the rise of local urbancontemporary music both in London and in the rest of the UnitedKingdom.[citation needed]A 2013 report by the City of LondonCorporation said that London is the "greenest city" in Europe with 35,000 acresof public parks, woodlands and gardens. The largest parks in the central areaof London are three of the eight Royal Parks, namely Hyde Park and itsneighbour Kensington Gardens in the west, and Regent's Park to the north. HydePark in particular is popular for sports and sometimes hosts open-air concerts.Regent's Park contains London Zoo, the world's oldest scientific zoo, and isnear the tourist attraction of Madame Tussauds Wax Museum. Primrose Hill,immediately to the north of Regent's Park, at 256 feet (78 m) is a popular spotfrom which to view the city skyline. Close to Hyde Park are smaller RoyalParks, Green Park and St. James's Park. A number of large parks lie outside thecity centre, including Hampstead Heath and the remaining Royal Parks ofGreenwich Park to the south-east and Bushy Park and Richmond Park (the largest)to the south-west, Hampton Court Park is also a royal park, but, because itcontains a palace, it is administered by the Historic Royal Palaces, unlike theeight Royal Parks.Close to Richmond Park is Kew Gardens which has the world'slargest collection of living plants. In 2003, the gardens were put on theUNESCO list of World Heritage Sites. There are also numerous parks administeredby London's borough Councils, including Victoria Park in the East End andBattersea Park in the centre. Some more informal, semi-natural open spaces alsoexist, including the 320-hectare (790-acre) Hampstead Heath of North London,and Epping Forest, which covers 2,476 hectares (6,118 acres) in the east. Bothare controlled by the City of London Corporation. Hampstead Heath incorporatesKenwood House, a former stately home and a popular location in the summermonths when classical musical concerts are held by the lake, attractingthousands of people every weekend to enjoy the music, scenery andfireworks.Epping Forest is a popular venue for various outdoor activities,including mountain biking, walking, horse riding, golf, angling, andorienteering.  Walking is a popular recreational activity in London. Areas thatprovide for walks include Wimbledon Common, Epping Forest, Hampton Court Park,Hampstead Heath, the eight Royal Parks, canals and disused railway tracks.Access to canals and rivers has improved recently, including the creation ofthe Thames Path, some 28 miles (45 km) of which is within Greater London, andThe Wandle Trail; this runs 12 miles (19 km) through South London along theRiver Wandle, a tributary of the River Thames. Other long distance paths,linking green spaces, have also been created, including the Capital Ring, theGreen Chain Walk, London Outer Orbital Path ("Loop"), Jubilee Walkway, LeaValley Walk, and the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Walk.London hashosted the Summer Olympics three times: in 1908, 1948, and 2012. making it thefirst city to host the modern Games three times. The city was also the host ofthe British Empire Games in 1934. In 2017, London hosted the WorldChampionships in Athletics for the first time.London's most popular sport isfootball and it has twelve Football League clubs, including five in the PremierLeague: Arsenal, Chelsea, Crystal Palace, Tottenham Hotspur, and West HamUnited. Other professional teams in London are Fulham, Queens Park Rangers,Brentford, Millwall, Charlton Athletic, AFC Wimbledon and Barnet.From 1924, the original Wembley Stadium was the home of the English nationalfootball team. It hosted the 1966 FIFA World Cup Final, with England defeatingWest Germany, and served as the venue for the FA Cup Final as well as rugbyleague's Challenge Cup final. The new Wembley Stadium serves exactly the samepurposes and has a capacity of 90,000.Two Aviva Premiership rugby union teamsare based in London, Saracens and Harlequins. London Scottish, London Welsh andLondon Irish play in the RFU Championship club and other rugby union clubs inthe city include Richmond F.C., Rosslyn Park F.C., Westcombe Park R.F.C. andBlackheath F.C.. Twickenham Stadium in south-west London is the national rugbyunion stadium, and has a capacity of 82,000 now that the new south stand hasbeen completed.While rugby league is more popular in the north of England,there are two professional rugby league clubs in London – the second tierChampionship One team, the London Broncos, who play at the Trailfinders SportsGround in West Ealing, and the third tier League 1 team, the London Skolarsfrom Wood Green, Haringey; in addition, Hemel Stags from Hemel Hempstead northof London also play in League 1. One of London's best-known annual sportscompetitions is the Wimbledon Tennis Championships, held at the All EnglandClub in the south-western suburb of Wimbledon. Played in late June to earlyJuly, it is the oldest tennis tournament in the world, and widely consideredthe most prestigious.London has two Test cricket grounds, Lord's (home ofMiddlesex C.C.C.) in St John's Wood and the Oval (home of Surrey C.C.C.) inKennington. Lord's has hosted four finals of the Cricket World Cup. Other keyevents are the annual mass-participation London Marathon, in which some 35,000runners attempt a 26.2 miles (42.2 km) course around the city, and the.